Many of you here have probably
heard of the 10,000 hours rule.
It’s the idea that to become great
in anything takes
10,000 hours of focused practice.
So you’d better get started
as early as possible.
The poster child for this story
is Tiger Woods.
His father famously gave him a putter
when he was seven months old.
Fast forward to the age of 21—
he’s the greatest golfer in the world.
Quintessential 10,000 hours story.
Another is that of the three
Polgar sisters,
whose father decided to teach them chess
in a very technical manner
from a very early age.
Two of his daughters went on to become
grandmaster chess players
I got curious: if this 10,000 hours rule
is correct,
then we should see that elite athletes
get a head start
in so-called deliberate practice.
And in fact,
when scientists study elite athletes,
they see that they spend more time
in deliberate practice.
Not a big surprise.
When they actually track athletes
over the course of their development,
the pattern looks like this:
the future elites tend to have what
scientists call a sampling period,
where they try a variety
of physical activities.
They gain broad general skills
and delay specializing
until later than peers who plateau
at lower levels.
That doesn’t really comport with
the 10,000 hours rule, does it?
So I started to wonder about other
domains that we associate
with obligatory early specialization,
like music.
Turns out the pattern is often similar.
The exceptional musicians didn’t start
spending more time in deliberate practice
than the average musicians
until their third instrument.
They too tended to have a sampling period.
Even musicians we think of as
famously precocious, like Yo-Yo Ma.
So this got me interested in exploring
the developmental backgrounds
of people whose work I had long admired.
Duke Ellington shunned music lessons
as a kid
to focus on baseball and painting
and drawing.
Mariam Mirzakhani wasn’t interested
in math as a girl,
dreamed of becoming a novelist,
and went on to become the first and so far
only woman to win the Fields Medal,
the most prestigious prize
in the world in math.
Vincent van Gogh had five different
careers before flaming out spectacularly,
and, in his late 20s,
picked up a book called
“The Guide to the ABCs of Drawing.”
Claude Shannon was an electrical engineer
at the University of Michigan
who took a philosophy course just
to fulfill a requirement.
And in it he learned about a near
century-old system of logic
by which true and false statements
could be coded as ones and zeros
and solved like math problems.
This led to the development
of binary code,
which underlies all
of our digital computers today.
Frances Hesselbein took her first
professional job at the age of 54,
and went on to become the CEO
of the Girl Scouts.
Here’s an athlete I’ve followed.
He tried some tennis,
some skiing, wrestling.
His mother was actually a tennis coach,
but she declined to coach him because
he wouldn’t return balls normally.
And he kept trying more sports:
handball, volleyball, soccer,
badminton, skateboarding.
So who is this dabbler?
This is Roger Federer.
Every bit as famous
as an adult as Tiger Woods.
And yet even tennis enthusiasts
don't usually know anything
about his developmental story.
Why is that?
I think it’s partly because
the Tiger story is very dramatic,
but also because it seems
like this tidy narrative
that we can extrapolate to anything that
we want to be good at in our own lives.
But it turns out that in many ways,
golf is a uniquely horrible model
of almost everything that humans
want to learn.
Golf is the epitome of what the
psychologist Robin Hogarth
called a kind learning environment.
Next steps and goals are clear;
rules that are clear and never change.
When you do something, you get feedback
that is quick and accurate.
Chess, also a kind learning environment.
On the other end of the spectrum
are wicked learning environments
where next steps and goals may not
be clear— rules may change.
You may or may not get feedback
when you do something,
it may be delayed, it may be inaccurate.
Which one of these sounds like
the world we're increasingly living in?
So if hyper-specialization isn’t always
the trick in a wicked world, what is?
That can be difficult to talk about,
because sometimes it looks like meandering
or zigzagging or keeping a broader view.
It can look like getting behind.
But if we look at research
on technological innovation,
it shows that increasingly the most
impactful patents are authored
by teams that include individuals
who have worked across a large
number of different technology classes
and often merge things
from different domains.
Someone whose work I've admired,
who was sort of on the forefront of this,
is a Japanese man named Junpei Yokoi.
Yokoi didn't score well
in his electronics exams at school,
so he had to settle for a low-tier job
as a machine maintenance worker
at a playing card company in Kyoto.
He combined some well-known
technology from the calculator industry,
with some well-known technology
from the credit card industry,
and made handheld games.
And it turned this playing card company,
which was founded in a wooden storefront
in the 19th century,
into a toy and game operation.
You may have heard of it,
it’s called Nintendo.
His magnum opus was the Game Boy.
We probably don't make
as many of those people as we could,
because we don't tend to incentivize
anything that doesn't
look like a head start or specialization.
And naturally, I think there are as many
ways to succeed as there are people,
but I think we tend only to incentivize
and encourage the Tiger path,
when increasingly, in a wicked world,
we need people
who travel the Roger path as well.
Or as the eminent physicist and
mathematician and writer
Freeman Dyson put it:
“For a healthy ecosystem,
we need both birds and frogs.
Frogs are down in the mud
seeing all the granular details.
The birds are soaring up above,
not seeing those details,
but integrating
the knowledge of the frogs.”
And we need both.
The problem, Dyson said, is that we’re
telling everyone to become frogs.
And I think in a wicked world,
that's increasingly shortsighted.